Indonesia to disband hard-line Islamic group Hizbut Tahrir
The Indonesian government will seek to disband the pro-Islamic caliphate group Hizb ut-Tahrir in the first of a likely series of bans aimed at undermining a potentially potent opposition ahead of the 2019 presidential poll.

The Co-ordinating Min­i­ster for Politics, Legal and Security, Wiranto, said yesterday he would petition the courts to dismantle the group as part of a wider review ordered by President Joko Widodo of mass organisations whose activities and ideology threaten national unity.

“We have examined one mass organisation, Hizb ut-Tahir Indonesia, and concluded that as a mass organisation HTI has not played a positive role and taken part in the national goal for development,” he said yesterday.

“Activities conducted by the HTI have been the source of controversy and friction amongst ­society and could threaten public security and safety and threaten the unity of ... Indonesia.”

General Wiranto said the move did not mean the government was against Islamic civil ­societies, but simply committed to “safeguarding the unity of the ­Indonesian people”.

Hizb ut-Tahrir is banned in many countries, including Germany, China, and Egypt, but has operated in Indonesia since the 1980s. The group was a major force behind the protest movement against defeated Jakarta governor Basuki Tjahaja “Ahok” Purnama, a key ally of the President, who faces a verdict today in what many believe was a politic­ally motivated blasphemy trial.

Indonesian moderates concerned at the rising influence of a more conservative Islam will ­likely welcome the HTI ban, but the move will also play into the hands of those now seeking to portray the President as a ­defender of Islam’s enemies.

The Indonesian chapter of Hizb ut-Tahrir is part of an influential international organisation openly committed to pursuing the removal of all existing governments in the Muslim world in favour of a pan-Islamic theocracy. In Indonesia, it is estimated to have as many as 3.5 million members, with its strongest support in cities and on university campuses.

“We operate legally, orderly, peacefully and almost never caused any legal problems,” HTI spokesman Ismail Yusanto said on the group’s website. “HTI will take the needed steps to reject its dissolution.”

“We were never invited for a discussion or questioned according to the law on mass organisation which stipulates that there are steps taken before a disbandment could be performed such as the first, second and third reprimand.”

“”HTI is a group which propagates Islamic teachings in this country which we believe to be the solution to the many problems this country faces.”

Mr Yusanto last week denied the group was anti-Pancasila and said he could not understand why it was on a watch list.

“HTI is an Islamic organisation whose main activity is propagating Islamic teachings. Sharia, caliphate — all are Islamic teachings. Administratively, we are a legitimate organisation, a legal entity,” he said.

Bonar Tigor Naipospos, deputy chairman of Indonesia’s pro-democracy Setara Institute, told The Australian he believed the move to dismantle HTI was part of a “larger government plan” to disarm protest movements against the government and ­Jokowi before the next election.